# Gamma-Hadron-Separation-Methods

## Overview
This README provides an overview of my Summer of 2023 project in which machine learning techniques (boosted decision trees, neural networks) were implemented and compared to the Standard Cut (SC) method used for gamma/hadron separation in VERITAS data. The goal is to achieve better significance levels on high-energy astronomical phenomena, with the Crab Nebula used for testing. 

## Packages
Open-sourced python packages were used for this project: numpy, scipy (for interpolation), matplotlib and pandas (for data visualization), astropy, gammapy, xgboost, tensorflow (keras), and sci-kit learn.

## Data
Although data for this project is not available in this repository, the context for its origin includes Monte Carlo simulations generated by two software packages:
 - CORSIKA (COsmic Ray SImulations for KAscade): Simulates extensive air showers.
 - GrOptics: Simulates the response of the VERITAS telescopes, producing similar readouts to actual VERITAS data.

Real data for the Crab Nebula was obtained from VERITAS (2013-2018, ~17 hours). The Crab Nebula is a standard in VHE field due to its brightness and steady flux at TeV energies, making it a convenient object to test on.

## Models
In the `models` folder, there are two supervised machine learning techniques used to train and fit models.

Boosted Decision Trees (BDT): Combines multiple weak learners into a strong learner using boosting algorithms. While BDTs are easy to interpret, they are prone to overfitting by latching onto peculiarities in data. In the BDT notebook, the Python packages XGBoost and scikit-learn were used. To preprocess data, StandardScaler was used to scale data, optimizing the performance of the BDT. RandomizedSearchCV was used to tune hyperparameters. Early stopping and consistency checks between training and test sets were implemented to prevent overfitting.

Neural Networks (NN): Data was preprocessed in the same way as for BDTs. Neural networks, inspired by the human brain, are capable of capturing complex relationships in data. The Python packages TensorFlow and Keras were used, with a network structure including an input layer, two hidden layers (16 neurons each, ReLU activation), and an output layer (1 neuron, sigmoid activation). Early stopping was also used to prevent overfitting.

## Sky Maps
In the `sky_maps` folder, the trained models are applied to Crab data along with VERITAS's Standard Cuts method, which applies "box" cuts on individual parameters.

## Summer 2023 Report
A report is included with a discussion of the results of the comparison of the methods. In conclusion, MLTs performed similarly overall to the SC method that VERITAS uses, but further exploration in certain energy bins highlights possible areas where MLTs may perform better or worse.
